---
title: Device Schema Extensions to the SCIM model
abbrev: SCIM Device Schema Extensions
docname: draft-ietf-scim-device-model-16
submissionType: IETF
category: std

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -  ins: M. Shahzad
    name: Muhammad Shahzad
    org: North Carolina State University
    street:
    - Department of Computer Science
    - 890 Oval Drive
    - Campus Box 8206
    city: Raleigh, NC
    code: 27695-8206
    country: USA
    email: mshahza@ncsu.edu
 -
    ins: H. Iqbal
    name: Hassan Iqbal
    org: North Carolina State University
    street:
    - Department of Computer Science
    - 890 Oval Drive
    - Campus Box 8206
    city: Raleigh, NC
    code: 27695-8206
    country: USA
    email: hassaniqbal931@gmail.com
 -
    ins: E. Lear
    name: Eliot Lear
    org: Cisco Systems
    street: Richtistrasse 7
    code: CH-8304
    city: Wallisellen
    country: Switzerland
    phone: +41 44 878 9200
    email: lear@cisco.com

normative:
  BLE54:
    title: Bluetooth Core Specification, Version 5.4
    author:
      -
        org: Bluetooth SIG
    date: 2023

  DPP2:
    title: Wi-Fi Easy Connect Specification, Version 2.0
    author:
      -
        org: Wi-Fi Alliance
    date: 2020

  FDO11:
    title: FIDO Device Onboard Specification 1.1
    author:
     -
       org: FIDO Alliance
    date: April 19, 2022
  Zigbee:
    title: Zigbee Specification
    author:
     -
       org: Zigbee Alliance
    date: August, 2015
    target: https://zigbeealliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/docs-05-3474-21-0csg-zigbee-specification.pdf

informative:
  JSONSchema:
    title: JSON Schema- A Media Type for Describing JSON Documents
    author:
     -
       ins: A. Wright
       name: Austin Wright
       role: editor
     -
       ins: H. A. Andrews
       name: Henry Andrews
       role: editor
     -
       ins: B. Hutton
       name: Ben Hutton
       org: Postman
       role: editor
     -
       ins: G. Dennis
       name: Greg Dennis
    date: December, 2022
    target: https://json-schema.org/draft/2020-12/json-schema-core
  OpenAPI:
    title: OpenAPI Specification, Version 3.1.1
    author:
     -
      org: swagger.io
    date: October, 2024
    target: https://swagger.io/specification/

--- abstract

The initial core schema for SCIM (System for Cross-domain Identity
Management) was designed for provisioning users. This memo specifies
schema extensions that enables provisioning of devices, using various
underlying bootstrapping systems, such as Wi-fi Easy Connect, FIDO
device onboarding vouchers, BLE passcodes, and MAC authenticated bypass.

--- middle

Introduction
============

The Internet of Things presents a management challenge in many
dimensions. One of them is the ability to onboard and manage large
number of devices. There are many models for bootstrapping trust
between devices and network deployments. Indeed it is expected that
different manufacturers will make use of different methods.

SCIM (System for Cross Identity Management) {{!RFC7643}} {{!RFC7644}}
defines a protocol and a schema for provisioning of users. However, it
can easily be extended to provision device credentials and other
attributes into a network. The protocol and core schema were designed
to permit just such extensions. Bulk operations are supported. This is
good because often devices are procured in bulk.

A primary purpose of this specification is to provision the network
for onboarding and communications access to and from devices within a
local deployment based on the underlying capabilities of those
devices. The underlying security mechanisms of some devices range from
non-existent such as the Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) "Just Works"
pairing method to a robust FIDO Device Onboard (FDO) mechanism.
Information from the SCIM server is dispatched to control functions
based on selected schema extensions to enable these communications
within a network.  The SCIM database is therefore essentially
equivalent to a network's Authentication, Authorization, and
Accounting (AAA) database, and should be carefully treated as such.

Why SCIM for devices?
---------------------
Some might ask why SCIM is well suited for this purpose and not, for
example, NETCONF {{?RFC6241}} or RESTCONF {{?RFC8040}} with YANG
{{?RFC7950}}. After all, there are all sorts of existing models
available. The answer is four fold:

- First, NETCONF and RESTCONF focus on **configuration** rather than
  provisioning.
- Second, SCIM is designed with inter-domain provisioning in mind.
  The use of HTTP as a substrate permits both user-based authentication
  for local provisioning applications, as well as OAUTH or certificate-
  based authentication.  the inter-domain nature of these operations
  does not expose local policy, which itself must be (and often is)
  configured with other APIs, many of which are not standardized.
- SCIM is also a familiar tool within the enterprise enviroment, used
  extensively to configure federated user accounts.  (Amusingly, one
  author noted a billboard in San Francisco highlighting a SCIM as
  part of a product capability.)
- Finally, once one chooses a vehicle such as SCIM, one is beholden
  to its data model.  The SCM data model is articulated in {{!RFC7643}}.

This taken together with the fact that end devices are not intended to
be **directly** configured leave us with SCIM as the best standard option.

Protocol Participants
---------------------

In the normal SCIM model, it was presumed that large federated
deployments would be SCIM clients who provision and remove employees
and contractors as they enter and depart those deployments, and
federated services such as sales, payment, or conferencing services
would be the servers.

In the device model, the roles are reversed, and may be somewhat more
varied. The SCIM server resides within a deployment and is used for
receiving information about devices that are expected to be connected
to its network. That server will apply appropriate local policies
regarding whether/how the device should be connected.

The client may be one of a number of entities:

 - A vendor who is authorized to add devices to a network as part of
   a sales transaction. This is similar to the sales integration
   sometimes envisioned by Bootstrapping Remote Key Infrastructure
   (BRSKI) {{?RFC8995}}.

 - A client application that administrators or employees use to add,
   remove, or get information about devices. An example might be an
   tablet or phone app that scans Wi-fi Easy Connect QR codes.

~~~ aasvg


                            +-----------------------------------+
                            |                                   |
    +-----------+   Request |  +---------+                      |
    | onboarding|------------->|  SCIM   |                      |
    |    app    |<-------------| Server  |                      |
    +-----------+  Ctrl Endpt  +---------+                      |
                            |                                   |
    +-----------+           |  +------------+         +-------+ |
    |  Control  |...........|..|    ALG     |.........|device | |
    |    App    |           |  +------------+         +-------+ |
    +-----------+           |                                   |
                            |                                   |
                            +-----------------------------------+

~~~
{: #arch title="Basic Architecture - non-IP example"}

In {{arch}}, the onboarding app provides the device particulars. As
part of the response, the SCIM server might provide additional
information, especially in the case of non-IP devices, where an
application-layer gateway may need to be used to communicate with
the device. The control endpoint is one among a number of objects
that may be returned.  That control endpoint will then communicate
with the application layer gateway (ALG) to reach the endpoint.

~~~ aasvg


                            +-----------------------------------+
                            |                                   |
    +-----------+   Request |  +---------+   +----+   +------+  |
    | onboarding|------------->|  SCIM   |-->| AAA|<->|switch|  |
    |    app    |<-------------| Server  |   +----+   +------+  |
    +-----------+  Ctrl Endpt  +---------+                |     |
                            |                             |     |
    +-----------+           |  +------------+         +-------+ |
    |  Control  |...........|..| router/fw  |.........|device | |
    |    App    |           |  +------------+         +-------+ |
    +-----------+           |                                   |
                            |                                   |
                            +-----------------------------------+

~~~
{: #arch2 title="Interaction with AAA"}

{{arch2}} shows how IP-based endpoints can be provisioned.  In this
case, the onboarding app provisions a device via SCIM. The necessary
information is passed to the AAA subsystem, such that the device is
permitted to connect.  Once it is online, since the device is based
on IP, it will not need an ALG, but will use the normal IP
infrastructure to communicate with its control application.

Schema Description
------------------

RFC 7643 does not prescribe a language to describe a schema, but instead
uses narrative description of JSON elements with examples.  We have provided
that same narrative description as normative, along with non-normative JSON Schema 
{{JSONSchema}} and OpenAPI {{OpenAPI}} versions in the appendices for 
ease of implementation. References to
these schema in the document are for informational purposes only.

Several additional schemas specify specific onboarding mechanisms,
such as Bluetooth Low energy (BLE) {{BLE54}}, Wi-fi Easy Connect {{DPP2}},
and FIDO Device Onboard {{FDO11}}.

## Schema Representation

Attributes defined in the device core schema and extensions comprise
characteristics and SCIM datatypes defined in Sections 2.2 and 2.3 of
the {{!RFC7643}}. This specifciation does not define new
characteristics and datatypes for the SCIM attributes.

Terminology
-----------
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL
NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED",
"MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in BCP 14 {{!RFC2119}} {{!RFC8174}} when, and only when, they
appear in all capitals, as shown here.


ResourceType Device
====================

A new resource type 'Device' is specified. The "ResourceType" schema
specifies the metadata about a resource type (see section 6 of
{{!RFC7643}}).  It comprises a core device schema and several
extension schemas. The core schema provides a minimal resource
representation, whereas extension schemas extend the core schema
depending on the device's capability. The JSON schema for Device
resource type is in {{resource-schema}}.


## Common Attributes

The Device schema contains three common attributes as defined in the
{{!RFC7643}}.  No semantic or syntax changes are made here, but the
attributes are listed merely for completeness.

id

An id is a required and unique attribute of the device core schema
(see section 3.1 of {{!RFC7643}}).

externalID

An externalID is an optional attribute (see section 3.1 of {{!RFC7643}}).

meta

Meta is a complex attribute and is required (see section 3.1 of {{!RFC7643}}).


SCIM Core Device Schema
=======================

The core device schema provides the minimal representation of a
resource "Device". It contains only those attributes that any device
may need, and only one attribute is required. The core schema for
"Device" is identified using the schema URI:
"urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:Device". The following
attributes are defined in the device core schema.

## Singular Attributes

displayName

This attribute is of type "string" and provides a human-readable name
for a device. It is intended to be displayed to end-users and should be
suitable for that purpose. The attribute is not required, and is not
case-sensitive. It may be modified and SHOULD be returned
by default. No uniqueness constraints are imposed on this attribute.

active

The "active" attribute is of type "boolean" and is a mutable
attribute, and is required. If set to TRUE, it means that this device
is intended to be operational. Attempts to control or access a device
where this value is set to FALSE may fail. For example, when used in
conjunction with NIPC {{?I-D.brinckman-nipc}}, commands such as
connect, disconnect, subscribe that control app sends to the
controller for the devices any command coming from the control app for
the device will be rejected by the controller.

mudUrl

The mudUrl attribute represents the URL to the Manufacturer Usage Description
(MUD) file associated
with this device. This attribute is optional and mutable.
The mudUrl value is case sensitive and not unique. When present, this attribute
may be used as described in {{!RFC8520}}. This attribute is case
sensitive and returned by default.


| Attribute   | Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return | Unique |
|-------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| displayName |   F   |  F  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   |  None  |
|-------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| active      |   F   |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   |  None  |
|-------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| mudUrl      |   F   |  F  |  T   |   RW    |  Def   |  None  |
{: #tabDevice title="Characteristics of device schema attributes. (Req = Required,
T = True, F = False, RW = ReadWrite, and Def = Default)"}

An example of a device SCIM object is as follows:

~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_core_schema_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

The schema for the device is presented in JSON format in Section
{{device-schema-json}}, while the openAPI representation is provided in
Section {{device-schema-openapi-representation}}.

Device Groups
=============

Device groups are created using the SCIM groups as defined in
{{!RFC7643}} Section 4.2.


Resource Type EndpointApp
=========================

This section defines a new resource type, 'EndpointApp'. The
"ResourceType" schema specifies the metadata about a resource type
(see section 6 of {{!RFC7643}}). The resource "EndpointApp" represents
client applications that can control and/or receive data from the
devices. The JSON schema for EndpointApp resource type is in {{resource-schema}}.

The attributes comprising EndpointsApp are listed in {{endpointapp-schema}}.
The "EndpointApp" are included in the endpoint applications extension
("endpointAppsExt") {{endpointsappext-schema}}.


SCIM EndpointApp Schema {#endpointapp-schema}
=======================

The EndpointApp schema is used to authorize clients control
or telemetry services for clients.  The schema identifies the application
and how clients are to authenticate to the various services.

The schema for "EndpointApp" is identified using the schema URI:
"urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core:2.0:EndpointApp". The following
attributes are defined in this schema.

## Common Attributes

The EndpointApp schema contains three common attributes as defined in the
{{!RFC7643}}.

## Singular Attributes

applicationType

This attribute is of type "string" and represents the type of
application. It will only contain two values; 'deviceControl'
or 'telemetry'. 'deviceControl' is the application that sends commands
to control the device. 'telemetry' is the application that receives
data from the device. The attribute is required, and is not
case-sensitive. The attribute is readOnly and should be returned
by default. No uniqueness constraints are imposed on this attribute.

applicationName

The "applicationName" attribute is of type "string" and represents a
human readable name for the application. This attribute is required and
mutable. The attribute should be returned by default and there is no
uniqueness contraint on the attribute.

clientToken

This attribute type string contains a token that the client will use
to authenticate itself. Each token may be a string up to 500
characters in length. It is not mutable, read-only, generated if
no certificateInfo object is provisioned, case sensitive and returned
by default if it exists.  The SCIM server should expect that client
tokens will be shared by the SCIM client with other components within
the client's infrastructure.

## Complex Attributes

### certificateInfo

It is the complex attribute that contains x509 certificate's subject
name and root CA information associated with application clients that
will connect for purposes of device control or telemetry.

rootCA

This is the base64 encoding  as
described in {{!rfc4648}} Section 4 a trust anchor certificate.  
This trust anchor is applicable
for certificates used for client application access.  The object
is not required, singular, case sensitive, and read/write.  If not
present, a set of trust anchors MUST be configured out of band.

subjectName

If present, this field may contain one of two names:

 * a distinguished name as that will be present in the certificate
   subject field, as de  scribed in Section 4.1.2.4 of {{!RFC5280}}; or
 * or a dnsName as part of a subjectAlternateName as  described in
   Section 4.2.1.6 of {{!RFC5280}}.

In the latter case, servers validating such certificates SHALL reject
connections when name of the peer as resolved by a DNS reverse lookup
does not match the dnsName in the certificate.  If multiple dnsNames
are present, it is left to server implementations to address any
authorization conflicts associated with those names.  This attribute
is not required, read write, singular and NOT case sensitive.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| applicationType|   F   |  T  |  F   |   R     |  Def   |  None  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| applicationName|   F   |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   |  None  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| clientToken    |   F   |  F  |  T   |   R     |  N   |  None  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| certificateInfo|   F   |  F  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   |  None  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| rootCA    |   F   |  F  |  T   |   RW    |  Def   |  None  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| subjectName    |   F   |  T  |  T   |   RW     |  Def   |  None  |
{: #tabEndpointApp title="Characteristics of EndpointApp schema attributes. (Req = Required, T = True, F = False, R = ReadOnly, RW = ReadWrite, Manuf = Manufacturer, N = No, and Def = Default)"}

Note that either clientToken or certificateInfo are used for the
authentication of the application.  If certificateInfo is NOT present
when an endpointApp is object created, then the server SHOULD return
a clientToken.  Otherwise, if the server accepts the certificateInfo
object for authentication, it SHOULD NOT return a clientToken.
If the server accepts and produces a clientToken, then control and
telemetry servers MUST validate both.  The SCIM client will know
that this is the case based on the SCIM object that is returned.

certificateInfo is preferred in situations where client functions
are federated such that different clients may connect for different
purposes.

~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_endpointapp_schema_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

The schema for the endpointApp is presented in JSON format in Section
{{endpointapp-schema-json}}, while the openAPI representation is provided in
Section {{endpointapp-schema-openapi-representation}}.


SCIM Device Extensions {#extensions}
======================

SCIM provides various extension schemas, their attributes, JSON
representation, and example object. The core schema is extended with a
new resource type, as described in {{resource-schema}}.  No
schemaExtensions list is specified in that definition.  Instead, an
IANA registry is created, where all values for "required" are set to
false.  All extensions to the Device schema MUST be registered via IANA,
as described in [](#device-schema-extensions).  The schemas below demonstrate how
this model is to work.  All the SCIM Server related Schema URIs are valid only
with Device resource types.

## BLE Extension

This schema extends the device schema to represent the devices
supporting BLE. The extension is identified using the following
schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:ble:2.0:Device

The attributes are as follows:

### Singular Attributes

deviceMacAddress

A string value that represent a public MAC address assigned by the
manufacturer. It is a unique  48-bit value. Ir is required, case
insensitive, and it is mutable and return as default. The regex
pattern is the following:

~~~~~~
^[0-9A-Fa-f]{2}(:[0-9A-Fa-f]{2}){5}$
~~~~~~

isRandom

A boolean flag taken from the BLE core specification, version 5.4. If FALSE,
the device is using a public MAC address. If TRUE, the device uses a
random address.  If an Idenifying Resolving Key (IRK) is present, the
address represents a resolvable private address.  Otherwise, the
address is assumed to be a random static address.  Non-resolvable
private addresses are not supported by this specification.  This
attribute is not required. It is mutable, and is returned by default.
The default value is FALSE.

separateBroadcastAddress

When present, this address is used for broadcasts/advertisements.
This value MUST NOT be set when an IRK is provided. Its form is the
same as deviceMacAddress. It is not required, multivalued, mutable,
and returned by default.

irk

A string value that specifies the identity resolving key (IRK), which
is unique to each device. It is used to resolve private random
address. It should only be provisioned when isRandom is TRUE. It is
mutable and never returned.  For more information about the use of
the IRK, see Section 5.4.5 of {{BLE54}}.

mobility

A boolean attribute to enable BLE device mobility. If set to TRUE, the
device could be expected to move within a network of APs.  For
example, BLE device is connected with AP-1 and moves out of range but
comes in range of AP-2, it will be disconnected with AP-1 and connects
with AP-2. It is returned by default and mutable.

### Multivalued Attributes

versionSupport

A multivalued attribute that provides all the BLE versions supported by the
device in the form of an array. For example,
\[4.1, 4.2, 5.0, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3\]. It is required, mutable, and
return as default.

pairingMethods

An array of pairing methods associated with the BLE
device. The pairing methods may require sub-attributes, such as
key/password, for the device pairing process. To enable the
scalability of pairing methods in the future, they are represented as
extensions to incorporate various attributes that are part of the
respective pairing process. Pairing method extensions are nested
inside the BLE extension. It is required, case sensitive, mutable, and
returned by default.

### BLE Pairing Method Extensions

The details on pairing methods and their associated attributes are in
section 2.3 of {{BLE54}}. This memo defines extensions for four
pairing methods that are nested insided the BLE extension schema. Each
extension contains the common attributes [](#common-attributes). These
extension are as follows:

(i) pairingNull extension is identified using the following schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:pairingNull:2.0:Device

pairingNull does not have any attribute. It allows pairing for BLE
devices that do not require a pairing method.

(ii) pairingJustWorks extension is identified using the following
schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:pairingJustWorks:2.0:Device

Just works pairing method does not require a key to pair devices. For
completeness, the key attribute is included and is set to 'null'. Key
attribute is required, immutable, and returned by default.


(iii) pairingPassKey extension is identified using the following
schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:pairingPassKey:2.0:Device

The passkey pairing method requires a 6-digit key to pair devices.
This extension has one singular integer attribute, "key", which is
required, mutable and returned by default. The key pattern is
as follows:

~~~~~
^[0-9]{6}$
~~~~~

(iv) pairingOOB extension is identified using the following
schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:pairingOOB:2.0:Device

The out-of-band pairing method includes three singular attributes,
i.e., key, randomNumber, and confirmationNumber.

key

The key is string value, required and received from out-of-bond
sources such as NFC. It is case sensitive, mutable, and returned
by default.

randomNumber

This attribute represents a nonce added to the key. It is an
integer value that is a required attribute. It is mutable and
returned by default.

confirmationNumber

An integer which some solutions require in RESTful message
exchange. It is not required. It is mutable and returned by default if
it exists.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| deviceMacAddress|   F   |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | Manuf  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| isRandom        |   F   |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| sepBroadcastAdd |   T   |  F  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| irk             |   F   |  F  |  F   |   WO    |  Nev   | Manuf  |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| versionSupport  |   T   |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| mobility        |   F   |  F  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| pairingMethods  |   T   |  T  |  T   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
{: #tabBLE title="Characteristics of BLE extension schema attributes.
sepBroadcastAdd is short for separateBroadcastAddress. (Req = Required,
T = True, F = False, RW = ReadWrite, WO=Write Only, Def = Default,
Nev = Never, and Manuf = Manufacturer)."}

An example of a device object with BLE extension is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_ble_object_v1.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

In the above example, the pairing method is "pairingPassKey", which implies
that this BLE device pairs using only a passkey. In another example below,
the pairing method is "pairingOOB", denoting that this BLE device uses the
out-of-band pairing method.

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_ble_object_v2.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

However, a device can have more than one pairing method. Support for multiple
pairing methods is also provided by the multi-valued attribute pairingMethods.
In the example below, the BLE device can pair with both passkey and OOB pairing
methods.

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_ble_object_v3.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~



The schema for the BLE extension is presented in JSON format in Section
[](#ble-extension-schema-json), while the openAPI representation is provided in
Section [](#ble-extension-schema-openapi-representation).

## Wi-Fi Easy Connect Extension


A schema that extends the device schema to enable Wi-Fi Easy Connect
(otherwise known as Device Provisioning Protocol or DPP). Throughout this
specification we use the term DPP.  The extension
is identified using the following schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:dpp:2.0:Device

The attributes in this extension are adopted from {{DPP2}}. The
attributes are as follows:


### Singular Attributes

dppVersion

An integer that represents the version of DPP the device supports.
This attribute is required, case insensitive, mutable, and
returned by default.

bootstrapKey

A string value representing an Elliptic-Curve Diffie-Hellman (ECDH) public
key. The base64 encoded lengths for P-256, P-384, and P-521 are
80, 96, and 120 characters. This attribute is required, case-sensitive,
mutable, and returned by default.

deviceMacAddress

The manufacturer assigns the MAC address stored as string. It is a
unique 48-bit value. This attribute is optional, case insensitive,
mutable, and returned by default. The regex pattern is as follows:

~~~~~
^[0-9A-Fa-f]{2}(:[0-9A-Fa-f]{2}){5}$
~~~~~

serialNumber

An alphanumeric serial number, stored as string, may also be passed
as bootstrapping information. This attribute is optional, case
insensitive, mutable, and returned by default.


### Multivalued Attributes

bootstrappingMethod

It is the array of strings of all the bootstrapping methods available
on the enrollee device. For example, \[QR, NFC\]. This attribute is
optional, case insensitive, mutable, and returned by default.

classChannel

This attribute is an array of strings of global operating class and
channel shared as bootstrapping information. It is formatted as
class/channel. For example, \['81/1','115/36'\]. This attribute
is optional, case insensitive, mutable, and returned by default.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| dppVersion         |  F  | T |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|--------------------|-----|---|------|---------|--------|--------|
| bootstrapKey       |  F  | T |  T   |   WO    |  Nev   | None   |
|--------------------|-----|---|------|---------|--------|--------|
| deviceMacAddress   |  F  | F |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | Manuf  |
|--------------------|-----|---|------|---------|--------|--------|
| serialNumber       |  F  | F |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|--------------------|-----|---|------|---------|--------|--------|
| bootstrappingMethod|  T  | F |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|--------------------|-----|---|------|---------|--------|--------|
| classChannel       |  T  | F |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|--------------------|-----|---|------|---------|--------|--------|
{: #tabDPP title="Characteristics of DPP extension schema attributes.
(Req = Required, T = True, F = False, RW = ReadWrite, WO = Write Only,
Def = Default, Nev = Never, and Manuf = Manufacturer)."}

An example of a device object with DPP extension is below:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_dpp_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

The schema for the DPP extension is presented in JSON format in Section
[](#dpp-extension-schema-json), while the openAPI representation is provided
in Section [](#dpp-extension-schema-openapi-representation).

## Ethernet MAB Extension

This extension enables a legacy means of (very) weak authentication,
known as MAC Authenticated Bypass (MAB), that is supported in many wired
ethernet solutions. If the MAC address is known, then the device may
be permitted (perhaps limited) access. The extension is identified
by the following URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:ethernet-mab:2.0:Device

Note that this method is not likely to work properly with
MAC address randomization.


### Single Attribute

This extension has a singular attribute:

deviceMacAddress

This is the Ethernet address to be provisioned onto the network. It
takes the identical form as found in both the BLE and DPP extensions.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| deviceMacAddress|   F   |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
{: #tabMAB title="Characteristics of MAB extension schema attributes
(Req = Required, T = True, F = False, RW = ReadWrite, and
Def = Default)"}

An example of a device object with EthernetMAB extension is shown below:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_mab_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

The schema for the EthernetMAB extension is presented in JSON format in
Section [](#ethernet-mab-extension-schema-json), while the openAPI
representation is provided in Section [](#ethernet-mab-extension-schema-openapi-representation).

## FIDO Device Onboard Extension

This extension specifies a voucher to be used by the FDO Device
Onboard (FDO) protocols {{FDO11}} to complete a trusted transfer of
ownership and control of the device to the environment.  The SCIM
server MUST know how to process the voucher, either directly
or by forwarding it along to an owner process as defined in the FDO
specification.

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:fido-device-onboard:2.0:Device

### Single Attribute

This extension has a singular attribute:

fdoVoucher

The voucher is formated as a PEM-encoded object in accordance with {{FDO11}}.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| fdoVoucher      |   F   |  T  |  F   |   WO    |  Nev   | None   |
{: #tabFDO title="Characteristics of FDO extension schema attributes
(Req = Required, T = True, F = False, WO = WriteOnly, and
Nev = Never)"}

An example of a device object with FDO extension is shown below:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_fdo_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

The schema for the FDO extension is presented in JSON format in
Section [](#fdo-extension-schema-json), while the openAPI
representation is provided in Section [](#fdo-extension-schema-openapi-representation).


## Zigbee Extension

A schema that extends the device schema to enable the provisioning of
Zigbee devices {{Zigbee}}. The extension is identified using the following
schema URI:


urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:zigbee:2.0:Device

It has one singular attribute and one multivalued
attribute. The attributes are as follows:


### Singular Attribute

deviceEui64Address

An EUI-64 (Extended Unique Identifier) device address stored as string.
This attribute is required, case insensitive, mutable, and returned by
default. The regex pattern is as follows:

~~~~~
^[0-9A-Fa-f]{2}(:[0-9A-Fa-f]{2}){7}$
~~~~~

### Multivalued Attribute

versionSupport

An array of strings of all the Zigbee versions supported
by the device. For example, \[3.0\]. This attribute is required, case
insensitive, mutable, and returned by default.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| deviceEui64Address|  F  |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| versionSupport    |  T  |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
{: #tabZigbee title="Characteristics of Zigbee extension schema attributes.
(Req = Required, T = True, F = False, RW = ReadWrite, and
Def = Default)"}

An example of a device object with Zigbee extension is shown below:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_zigbee_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

The schema for the Zigbee extension is presented in JSON format in
Section [](#zigbee-extension-schema-json), while the openAPI
representation is provided in Section [](#zigbee-extension-schema-openapi-representation).



## The Endpoint Applications Extension Schema {#endpointsappext-schema}

Sometimes non-IP devices such as those using BLE or Zigbee require an
application gateway interface to manage them. SCIM clients MUST NOT
specify this to describe native IP-based devices.

endpointAppsExt provides the list application that connect to
enterprise gateway. The endpointAppsExt has one multivalued attribute
and two singular attributes. The extension is identified using the
following schema URI:

urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:extension:endpointAppsExt:2.0:Device

### Singular Attributes


deviceControlEnterpriseEndpoint

Device control apps use this URL of the enterprise endpoint to reach
the enterprise gateway. When the enterprise receives the SCIM object from
the onboarding app, it adds this attribute to it and sends it back as
a response to the onboarding app. This attribute is required,
case-sensitive, mutable, and returned by default. The uniqueness is
enforced by the enterprise.

telemetryEnterpriseEndpoint

Telemetry apps use this URL of the enterprise endpoint to reach the
enterprise gateway. When the enterprise receives the SCIM object from
the onboarding app, it adds this attribute to it and sends it back as
a response to the onboarding app. This attribute is optional,
case-sensitive, mutable, and returned by default. The uniqueness is
enforced by the enterprise.  An implementation MUST generate an
exception if telemetryEnterpriseEndpoint is not returned and telemetry
is required for the proper functioning of a device.


### Multivalued Attribute

applications

This is a complex multivalued attribute. It represents a list of
endpoint applications i.e., deviceControl and telemetry. Each entry in
the list comprises two attributes including "value" and "$ref".

value

It is the identifier of the endpoint application formated as UUID. It
is same as the common attribute "$id" of the resource "endpointApp".
It is read/write, required, case insensitive and returned by default.

$ref

It is the reference to the respective endpointApp resource object
stored in the SCIM server. It is readOnly, required, case sensitive
and returned by default.

| Attribute| Multi Value | Req | Case Exact| Mutable | Return| Unique |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| devContEntEndpoint |  F  |  T  |  T   |   R     |  Def   | Ent    |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| telEntEndpoint     |  F  |  F  |  T   |   R     |  Def   | Ent    |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| applications       |  T  |  T  |  F   |   RW    |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| value              |  F  |  T  |  F   |   RW     |  Def   | None   |
|------------------|-------|-----|------|---------|--------|--------|
| $ref               |  F  |  T  |  F   |   R     |  Def   | None   |
{: #tabEndpointAppsExt title="Characteristics of EndpointAppsExt extension schema
attributes. DevContEntEndpoint represents attribute
deviceControlEnterpriseEndpoint and telEntEndpoint represents
telemetryEnterpriseEndpoint. (Req = Required, T = True, F = False,
R = ReadOnly, RW = ReadWrite, Ent = Enterprise, and Def = Default)."}

An example of a device object with endpointAppsExt extension is below:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include examples/SCIM_device_endpoints_with_ble_object.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

The schema for the endpointAppsExt extension along with BLE extension is
presented in JSON format in Section {{endpointappsext-extension-schema-json}}, while
the openAPI representation is provided in Section {{endpointappsext-extension-schema-openapi-representation}}.

Security Considerations
=======================

Because provisioning operations permit device access to a network,
each SCIM client MUST be appropriately authenticated.

## SCIM operations

An attacker that has authenticated to a trusted SCIM client could
manipulate portions of the SCIM database.  To be clear on the risks,
we discuss each operation below:

### Unauthorized Object Creation

An attacker that is authenticated could attempt to add
elements that the enterprise would not normally permit on a network.
For instance, an enterprise may not wish specific devices that have
well-known vulnerabilities to be introduced to their environment.
To mitigate the attack, network administrators should layer additional
policies regarding what devices are permitted on the network.

An attacker that gains access to SCIM could attempt to add an IP-based
device that itself attempts unauthorized access, effectively acting as
a Bot.  Network administrators SHOULD establish appropriate access-control
policies that follow the principle of least privilege to mitigate this
attack.

## Object Deletion

Once granted, even if the object is removed, the server may or may not
act on that removal.  The deletion of the object is a signal of intent
by the application that it no longer expects the device to be on the
network.  It is strictly up to the SCIM server and its back end policy
to decide whether or not to revoke access to the infrastructure.  It is
RECOMMENDED that SCIM delete operations trigger a workflow in accordance
with local network policy.

## Read operations

Read operations are necessary in order for an application to sync its
state to know what devices it is expected to manage.  An attacker with
access to SCIM objects may gain access to the devices themselves.  To
prevent one SCIM client from interfering with devices that it has no
business managing, only clients that have created objects or those
they authorize SHOULD have the ability to read those objects.

## Update Operations

Update operations may be necessary if a device has been modified in
some way.  Attackers with update access may be able to disable network
access to devices or device access to networks.  To avoid this, the
same access control policy for read operations is RECOMMENDED here.

## Higher level protection for certain systems

Devices provisioned with this model may be completely controlled by
the administrator of the SCIM server, depending on how those systems
are defined. For instance, if BLE passkeys are provided, the device
can be connected to, and perhaps paired with. If the administrator of
the SCIM client does not wish the network to have complete access to
the device, the device itself MUST support finer levels of access
control and additional authentication mechanisms.
Any additional security
must be provided at higher application layers. For example, if client
applications wish to keep private information to and from the device,
they should encrypt that information over-the-top.

## Logging

An attacker could learn what devices are on a network by examining
SCIM logs.  Due to the sensitive nature of SCIM operations, logs
SHOULD be encrypted both on the disk and in transit.

IANA Considerations
===================

New Schemas
-----------

The IANA is requested to add the following additions to the "SCIM
Schema URIs for Data Resources" registry as follows:

| URN | Name | Reference |
| --- | ---  | --------  | 
| urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core: 2.0:Device| Core Device Schema | This memo, [](#scim-core-device-schema)|
|urn:ietf:params:scim:schemas:core: 2.0:EndpointApp|Endpoint Application|This memo, {{endpointapp-schema}}|

Note that the line break in URNs should be removed, as should this comment.

Device Schema Extensions
------------------------

IANA is requested to create the following extensions in the SCIM
Server-Related Schema URIs registry as described in {{extensions}}:


| URN | Description | Resource Type | Reference |
|-----|-------------|-----------|-----------|
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: ble:2.0:Device | BLE Extension | Device |This memo, [](#ble-extension) |
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: ethernet-mab:2.0:Device| Ethernet MAB | Device | This memo, [](#ethernet-mab-extension) |
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: fido-device-onboard:2.0:Device | FIDO Device Onboard | Device | This memo, [](#fido-device-onboard-extension)|
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: dpp:2.0:Device | Wi-fi Easy Connect | Device | This memo, [](#wi-fi-easy-connect-extension) |
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: endpointAppsExt:2.0:Device| Application Endpoint Extension | Device | This memo, [](#ble-pairing-method-extensions)|
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: pairingJustWorks:2.0:Device | Just Works Auth BLE | Device | This memo, [](#ble-pairing-method-extensions)|
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: pairingOOB:2.0:Device| Out of Band Pairing for BLE | Device | This memo, [](#ble-pairing-method-extensions)|
| urn:ietf:params:scim: schemas:extension: pairingPassKey:2.0:Device | Passkey Pairing for BLE | Device | This memo, [](#ble-pairing-method-extensions)|

# Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Bart Brinckman, Rohit Mohan, Lars
Streubesand, Christian Amsüss, Jason Livingwood, Mike Ounsworth, Monty
Wiseman, Geoffrey Cooper, Paulo Jorge N. Correia, and Phil Hunt for
their reviews, and Nick Ross for his contribution to the Appendix.

--- back

Changes from Earlier Versions
=============================
\[RFC Editor to remove this section.\]

Drafts 14 and 15:
  * Resolve DISCUSSes

Draft 13:
  * post IANA and IETF LC

Drafts 10-12:
  * additional WGLC and shepherd comments

Draft -09:
  * last call comments, bump BLE version, add acknowledgments.
  * Also, recapture Rohit comments and those of Christian.

Drafts 04-08:
  * Lots of cleanup
  * Security review responses
  * Removal of a tab
  * Dealing with certificate stuff

Draft -03:
  * Add MAB, FDO
  * Some grammar improvements
  * fold OpenAPI
  * IANA considerations

Draft -02:
  *  Clean up examples
  *  Move openapi to appendix
Draft -01:

  *  Doh! We forgot the core device scheme!

Draft -00:

  * Initial revision


JSON Schema Representation
=============================

## Resource Schema {#resource-schema}

~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include SCIM_resource_type.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

## Device Core Schema {#device-schema-json}


~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include SCIM_device_core_schema_representation.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

## EndpointApp Schema {#endpointapp-schema-json}

~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include SCIM_endpointApp_schema_representation.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~


## BLE Extension Schema {#ble-extension-schema-json}
~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include extensions/SCIM_BLE_extension_schema.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

## DPP Extension Schema  {#dpp-extension-schema-json}
~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include extensions/SCIM_DPP_extension_schema.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

## Ethernet MAB Extension Schema  {#ethernet-mab-extension-schema-json}
~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include extensions/SCIM_mab_extension_schema.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~

## FDO Extension Schema  {#fdo-extension-schema-json}
~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include extensions/SCIM_fdo_extension_schema.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~

## Zigbee Extension Schema  {#zigbee-extension-schema-json}
~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include extensions/SCIM_zigbee_extension_schema.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~

## EndpointAppsExt Extension Schema {#endpointappsext-extension-schema-json}
~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include extensions/SCIM_endpoint_extension_schema.ftxt}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~


# OpenAPI representation

The following sections are provided for informational purposes.

## Device Core Schema OpenAPI Representation {#device-schema-openapi-representation}

OpenAPI representation of device core schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/device_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~~


## EndpointApp Schema OpenAPI Representation {#endpointapp-schema-openapi-representation}
OpenAPI representation of endpointApp schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/endpointapp_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~


## BLE Extension Schema OpenAPI Representation
OpenAPI representation of BLE extension schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/SCIM_BLE_extension_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

## DPP Extension Schema OpenAPI Representation
OpenAPI representation of DPP extension schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/SCIM_DPP_extension_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

## Ethernet MAB Extension Schema OpenAPI Representation
OpenAPI representation of Ethernet MAB extension schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/SCIM_MAB_extension_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

## FDO Extension Schema OpenAPI Representation
OpenAPI representation of FDO extension schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/SCIM_FDO_extension_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

## Zigbee Extension Schema OpenAPI Representation
OpenAPI representation of zigbee extension schema is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/SCIM_zigbee_extension_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

## EndpointAppsExt Extension Schema OpenAPI Representation {#endpointappsext-extension-schema-openapi-representation}
OpenAPI representation of endpoint Apps extension schema
is as follows:

~~~~~~~~
<CODE BEGINS>
{::include openapi/SCIM_endpoint_extension_schema.fyml}
<CODE ENDS>
~~~~~~~~

# Fido Device Onboarding Example Flow

The following diagrams are included to demonstrate how FDO can be used.  In this first diagram, a device
is onboarded not only to the device owner process, but also to the AAA server for initial onboarding.
The voucher contains a device certificate that is used by the AAA system for authentication.

~~~ aasvg
{::include fdo-example-diagram.atxt}
~~~

After this flow is complete, the device can then first provisionally onboard, and then later receive
a trust anchor through FDO's TO2 process.  This is shown below.

~~~ aasvg
{::include fdo-example-two.atxt}
~~~
